# The Vision

Traditional computer programming embeds static problem solving methods in
computers. Machine learning is a branch of artifical intelligence devoted to
embedding dynamic problem solving skills in computers. With ML, we can program a
computer to solve a program we don't know how to solve. It may even be a problem
that no human has ever solved before. The methods are rooted in statistics and
mathematics, but the solutions are decidedly empirical in nature. The solutions
yielded by an ML approach rarely rely on a known law of physical processes.
Instead, we exploit the latent information in data. ML is the art of using
correlations in data to inform decision-making, often without any real idea what
causal relationships actually exist.

This site is meant to be a collection of intuitive articles on machine learning
algorithms and methods. The goal is to always maintain mathematical rigor but
never sacrifice intuitive insight. The expository method will generally involve
problem presentation, exploration, modeling, interpretation, data generation,
application, revision, cleansing, experimentation, and results. Focus will be
placed on thorough discussion of assumptions and limitations of modeling
approaches for various types of data.

A secondary goal is to address existing limitations in ML academic publishing.
Two large gaps are discussion of failed experiments and dead-end roads and
discussion of data cleansing. Academic publishing requires forward progress,
but not all progress moves forward. Most experimentation effort is expended
discovering what doesn't work. As much time as this consumes, it is still a
fraction of the overall ML project lifecycle. Before experimentation even
begins, the data must be cleansed. This is often 80% or more of the effort
involved in an ML project. Data cleansing is often not glamorous, but principled
data cleansing is an integral part of success in ML.
